# Chapter 0x200: Programming

**Notes:**
- Assembler: takes assembly language into machine-readable code
- Assembly language varies from architecture to architecture (Intel X86, Sparc, Arm)
- Compiler: converts high level language into machine language

**Questions:**

What is a variable?
- Simply thought of as an object that holds data that can be changed. (Not to be misconstrued with an OOP object)
- Variables that don’t change are constants

What is variable scope?
- Also referred to as context, in particular, the contexts of variables within functions

Local vs Static vs Global Scope
- Variables can have global scope, which persist across all functions.
- Variables that are local scope persist only in the function
- Static Variables are similar to global, use the static keyword, and remain intact between function calls, but they remain local within a particular function context, the initialization happens once, so even if “reinitialized”, it maintains the same value prior

What are variable types?
- Refers to the system used for declaring variables or functions of different types, the type of variable determines how much space it occupies in memory and how the bit pattern stored is implemented.
- Basic types, such char, int, float, double
- C99 added boolean type
- Void type
- Derived types, such as pointer types, array types, structure types, function types, etc.

What is a pointer?
- Similar to the EIP register, a pointer is a data type that points to a certain memory address. Useful as physical memory cannot actually be moved, and they can be defined and used like any other variable type

What can a pointer point to?
- Pointer points to something that is of the same data type, char pointer will point to somewhere in memory that is 1 byte in size, 
- Another example is for an array, a pointer can point to the index, and will point to the first index of the array
- Sizeo f pointer is dependent on machine (4 bytes for 32 bit, 8 bytes for 64 bit)

What is an array?
- Consider it a list, simply put
- Contains n elements of a specific data type
- Also referred to as a buffer

What is a string?
- There is not a string type, it is considered a char array in C.
- They are null terminated with ‘\0’
- There are string literals - sequence of characters enclosed in “”, also known as string constant

What is casting?
- A method of temporarily changing a variable’s data type, despite how it was originally defined. Typecasting only changes the datatype for that operation, and not the original variable

What is a function prototype?
- A way to tell the compiler to expect a function with this name, its return data type, and these data types as its functional arguments, no need to actually define any variable names in the prototype

How can you tell the return type of a function?
- Functions are declared by the data type of the variable they are returning, and if returning nothing, the type should be void

How do you pass arguments to a function?
- You can pass variables as arguments after the functions name in order to modify the way the function operates

What is a struct?
- Variables that contain different types of variables, each variable in a structure is known as a member of the structure. Unlike an array, it can contain many different types

What is a register?
- Set of special variables that are apart of a process, instructions use them to read or write data

What are the x86 registers and what are they used for?
- Registers are somewhat like variables built in for the processor, there are general registers such as eax, ebx, segment registers, index and pointers such as ESI which is the stack pointer and indicators such as EFLAGS

What is meant by little endianness?
- Means the least significant byte is stored first, i.e. 0x00000001 is stored in memory as 0x01, 0x00, 0x00, 0x00

What is assembly language?
- A step above machine language, it uses names for different instructions and variables instead of numbers

What are the sources for the values used in an assembly instruction?
- The destination and source values will either be a register, a memory address or a value

What happens when the call instruction executes?
- Changes the EIP to a different address of memory, return address is pushed onto the stack and the execution flow jumps to the start of the function

What is a function prologue?
- Code generated by the compiler to setup memory for the rest of the main functions local variables

How are function arguments accessed?
- They are pushed onto the stack frame prior to the function call and before the return address, can use EBP to access this

How are local variables accessed?
- They are pushed onto the stack frame after the function call, can use EBP to access this (pg 73)

What sections is a program divided into?
- Five segments, text, data, bass, heap and stack

What kind of data is stored in each section?
- Text segment also referred to as code segment, this is where the assembled machine language instructions of the program are located
- Data segment constraints initialized global and static variables
- Bss segment is filled with their uninitialized counterparts
- Heap segment is segment of memory a programmer can directly control
- Stack segment has variable size and is used as a temporary scratch pad to store local function variables and context during function calls

What is the stack and how does it work?
- Abstract data structure that has FILO ordering, which means the first item that is put into the stack is the last item to come out of it

What is a stack frame?
- The stack that is created when a function is called

How can you view the details of a stack frame in gdb?
- Can view the disassembled machine instructions for main and a certain function and what addresses they begin at

What is a file descriptor?
- Primary way of accessing files in C, uses a set of low-level I/O functions and are more direct

What is a format parameter?
- Aka escape sequences, begins with % and uses a single character shorthand and is put into the format string where it takes on an additional argument, can pass in decimal, unsigned decimal, strings, etc

